## Patient sequencing and annotation
Whole genome sequencing was performed at MEE genomics core and genome sequencing was performed at the Center for Mendelian Genomics at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard using methodology described [previously](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.11.30.22282952v2)  (Scott, Bujakowska et al 2022). Sequencing data was aligned to human genome 38 and variants were called using Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) HaplotypeCaller package version 3 (https://software.broadinstitute.org/gatk/) and annotated using VEP and VCFAnno. CNV predictions were produced using gCNV.

## Intron variants selection for cryptic exon library and oligo design
Patients’ cases were chosen basing on clear clinical picture of IRD (inherited retinal disease), inheritance pattern and enough diagnostic data. Variant search was inside the GEDI v.7 gene list with MAF <=0,01 (allele frequency), All passing variants (quality reads), AR inheritance. List of variants was filtered for all 1 hits for AR IRDs where one strong pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant was found in the patient, which fits all the listed criteria: 
  
a) ClinVar – P/LP, VUS, conflicting interpretation, unknown   
b) Damaging in at least 2 out of 4 prediction algorithms  
c) Absence in homozygous state in GnomAD and Exac
 
For the exonic variants after comparison with the clinical picture most relevant possibly causative gene mutations rare deep intronic variants were chosen into the variant list.
Deep intronic variants (DIVs) in known IRD genes that were 50 base pairs (bp) or more from the nearest exon were selected as possible candidates for the splicing assay from the patients with already confirmed 1 pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutation in one of IRD genes in trans position. 270 bp intron oligo and 15 bp flanking adapter sequences containing _AgeI_ and *NheI* restriction sites, introns included the _AgeI_ and _NheI_ restriction sites were excluded, we used Broad developed software, SEQR https://seqr.broadinstitute.org/ to prioritize rare deep intronic variants in these introns (MAF <0.01) found in the unsolved IRD subjects. In total 672 variants in 58 IRD genes were selected (see raw data [variants file](https://github.com/meei-ogi/intron-variant-effect/data/raw/variants.xlsx)). Each variant was staggered 50 bp to the left and 50 bp to the right creating 3 oligos for each intronic variant for checking to exclude the nearest genomic context influencing on splicing. A pool of ssDNA oligos synthesized on silicone array-based method was purchased from a commercial vendor (TWIST Biosciences, USA).

## High throughput splicing assay (HTSA) design
We have adapted a published approach from Cheung and colleagues, who kindly shared with us the SMN1 intron backbone plasmid with split GFP-T2A-mCherry and the HEK2937-RCA7 cell line. In our design, we altered the SMN1 split GFP-T2A-mCherry plasmid, where we decoupled the mCherry and GFP expression to be able to study out-of-frame exons. For the uniform expression of both fluorophores, we introduced EF1alpha promoters in front of the split GFP and mCherry genes. This altered vector we call HTSA vector. The vector also contains attB sites for integration into the AAVS1 locus of the HEK293T-RCA7 landing pad cell line, as well as a promoter-less puromycin resistance cassette. HEK293T-RCA7 contains an attP site and the promoter that allows for the site-specific recombination of the HTSA insert and coupling of the promoter.

## Cloning
We designed two oligonucleotide libraries:
  
a) control (REF) library containing 672 study intron variants with reference sequences; and  
b) variant (ALT) library containing matching 672 study deep intronic variants staggered in three left, centered and right 50 bp shift, with altered sequences of study variants.

This approach led to 4032 sequences in total. Sequences that included the _AgeI_ and _NheI_ restriction sites were excluded. The library was amplified with Fwd- AgeI primer: 5’-ACGGCCAGTACCGGT-3’ and NheI-Rev primer 5’-GCTATGACCGCTAGC-3’ with a high-fidelity polymerase (KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix, Roche) for a maximum of 15 cycles and cloned to the HTSA vector by the _AgeI_ and _NheI_ restriction cloning. 
Due to oligonucleotide length limitation of 270 bp and unknown placement of the cryptic exons this in vitro experiment caused by manufacturing technological process, we used staggering approach for both reference (REF) and altered (ALT) oligos library design to improve accuracy of detecting variants that cause splicing anomaly.  Maximum allowed size of oligo libraries was 300 bp, after removing 15 bp adaptors from each side, we had 270 bp oligonucleotide context, which was not enough to check the cell environment splicing machinery activity. That’s why three versions of oligos were synthesized: centered, staggered left and staggered right making it 4032 oligos in two separate libraries (REF and ALT). 

## Cell culture
After NGS confirmation of the desired diversity (Novaseq 6000, Illumina), the libraries were transfected into the HEK293-RCA7 cell line. (10 cm plates with 50% confluent cells, 3 replictes for both REF and ALT libraries).  Transient transfection during 48 hours was used withlipofectamine3000 protocol. Cells were lysed in 48 hours with RLTplus buffer. Total RNA was extracted – and reverse transcription (RT) protocol applied to get cDNA.

Genomic DNA (gDNA) was removed during RNA extraction with a commercial kit (Qiagen All-Prep Kit) and the integrated fragments were PCR amplified with HTSA-NGS-F primer 5’-CTATATATAGCTATCTATGTCTACCGGT-3’ and a commercial kit (Qiagen All-Prep Kit) and the integrated fragments were PCR amplified with HTSA-NGS-R primer 5’- GGCTGGAACTCTTGCGCTAG-3’ with a high-fidelity polymerase (Primestar GXL Polymerase, Takara) for a maximum of 20 cycles. The amplicons were multiplexed and deep sequenced with a targeted depth of >500 reads per oligo (250x250 pair-end reads, Novaseq 6000, Illumina). Primers for phasing were designed using Primer 3 software (ELIXIR - European research infrastructure for biological information).

## Data analysis and statistics. 
Deep intron sequence reads were determined by NGS and matched to the oligo sequences in the corresponding library, counted and normalized by coverage (reads per million in each pool). RT-PCR sequencing data was providing reads count for each oligonucleotide fragment. Ratio of ALT/REF was measured. Three biological replicates were done for each comparison. All figures were prepared with Microsoft Excel, Graphpad Prism 8, Biorender, and Adobe Illustrator.
